# Swift Reflections
## Week 1
### What makes a work a piece E-Literature?
Electronic literature is art that is based in the written word but created in convergence with the added possibilities of computerisation. E-literature is constructed and developed in collaboration with cyberspace and intended for consumption in the digital realm. 

From what I've gathered from the readings, a work of E-literature must artistically engage with the process of digitisation beyond reasons of pure functionality. The computerisation of the written word must be an act of artmaking: traversing computation, multimedia, and interactivity in its realisation. 
### Of the key examples above, which did you like most and why?
**The Gathering Cloud** struck the right chords. I could feel some sense of the possibilities of the field through the kinetic nature of the work. The writing in conjunction with the movement of the images, hyperlinks and animations made it feel like foreign ground. The interaction required to fully realise the piece encouraged me to truly dive into Carpenter’s themes. The layers of media and different mediums pushed me deeper into this juxtaposition between cloud computing and the literal cloud. 
### What do you expect from this class? What would you like to be better at by the end of semester?
I expect to become more comfortable with experimenting with HTML and constructing basic code. I also expect to become more interested and engaged with the field of E-Literature altogether, something completely new to me. While improving my ability to interact with digital platforms and processes, I also hope to expand my, presently very narrow, approach to creative writing. I hope to work in ways I hadn't previously considered possible and move through an expanded terrain of creative possibility.
## Week 2
### What are some of the constraints and tensions that Hayles notes have motivated writers to experiment in the field of E-Lit?
**In reference to passage from *Hayles, (2007) ‘E-Lit: what is it?’*:**
> Readers come to digital work with expectations formed by print, including extensive and deep tacit knowledge of letter forms, print conventions, and print literary modes. Of necessity, electronic literature must build on these expectations even as it modifies and transforms them. At the same time, because electronic literature is normally created and performed within a context of networked and programmable media, it is also informed by the powerhouses of contemporary culture, particularly computer games, films, animations, digital arts, graphic design, and electronic visual culture. In this sense electronic literature is a "hopeful monster" (as geneticists call adaptive mutations) composed of parts taken from diverse traditions that may not always fit neatly together. Electronic literature tests the boundaries of the literary and challenges us to re-think our assumptions of what literature can do and be.

The rapid mutation and evershifting nature of e-literature has drawn writers to the field and away from the constraints of traditional literature. The habits, conventions, expectations, and modes of engagement the traditional reader applies to the written word has stifled its possibilities and neglected the fluid nature of culture. 

Although E-literature has sprouted from traditional print, the genre is engaged with a multitude of cultural avenues, such as the ones mentioned by Hayles (2007) above: computer games, internet culture, social media etc. The neglect of contemporary culture prominent in traditional literature and the suffocation this ignorance promotes has inspired writers to sail into these unchartered waters. What Hayles (2007) outlines is a fluid and chaotic mode of creation that’s as equally exciting as it is confusing. It is this tension between uncertainty and possibility that has propelled many into the field.
### In terms of AI and ethics, consider where your own boundaries are in terms of what is unacceptable or acceptable use of AI. What do you see as potential ethical use-cases of AI (e.g., for research, for furthering open-source knowledge, for testing new areas of learning)? What are your hopes for the future of AI?
Although I am apprehensive of adopting AI into any form of creative practice, and approach it with a level of resentment (mostly from the decline in employment opportunity), I feel as though it is, or is capable of, doing things that are largely beneficial to human existence. I am cautious, like many others, of falling into the routine response of hate born from fear of the unknown.

From a utopian perspective, AI is, or can be, taking away much of the mechanical and monotonous work from everyday life. In theory, this handing over could free us up to be truly creative — to get to know ourselves in ways that previously weren't possible. With the mechanical movements of the mind delegated to an LLM, we could open new space for something more substantial and fulfilling to take place. 

On the contrary, one could argue that this process removes the container for creative action to take place. In the monotony, in the mundane processes of ordinary life, we find the will and need to create. We find the material for art. The mechanical nature of certain thoughts and tasks allows creation and human endeavour to take place. If we outsource these things to LLM’s we might sacrifice the structure and craft that allows for artistic and philosophical creation to take place. 

Thus, I approach the topic of AI with caution. My hope for AI is probably what public education promised the world when it was introduced in the 19th century. To provide free and open access to resources and education, only on a far more exaggerated level. To bring about a new age of information and growth (both creatively and literally) that wasn’t even imaginable. If this helps humanity progress in science, technology, philosophy and the arts, then I can’t object. 

The only thing to truly fear is the byproducts of this revolution: convenience-born laziness and the centralisation of data and information. I don’t want AI to be a technology of secrecy and algorithmic surveillance. A centralised entity shouldn’t be equipped with the power to decide what’s right or real or valuable. I guess opensource is the answer to that point of hesitation. 

I am afraid of not understanding but just accepting AI as an all-consuming master, not something that can I wield to further develop myself and my understanding of the world. Through familiarising myself with it, I hope to find some sort of control and autonomy that allows me to flourish in its benefits but not succumb to it. 
## Week 3
### Having considered Berens' critique of Instgram poetry, now read this excellent essay *Closer to the Metal* by Caleb Triscari. Reflect on your own relationship to the ubiquitous digital platforms of daily life. How do you currenly position yourself in relation to technology in your creative writing pratice?
To use, Triscari’s terminology I am completely alienated from the metal, sitting atop abstraction upon abstraction. Like an obedient Labrador, I move between apps, websites and algorithms, wagging my tail. Even in my constant interactions with MS Word, I take features and mechanisms for granted. Writing on GitHub has amplified this sensation, now having to add the required syntax for headings, italics and bold text. I try to type long-winded sentences without errors that would otherwise be announced to me through grammar and spellcheck. 

What I agree with is Triscari’s observation that it is our responsibility as users of the internet, to become familiar with its mechanics. To obtain some level of autonomy and understanding that allows us to truly explore its possibilities. Rather than passive and wearisome engagement, E-lit (and other things) require curious and active understanding of the processes that take place behind the glitter. Much like how a writer must understand language to wield it, a user of the web should understand the inner workings of their digital platforms in the same manner. This is a relationship I acknowledge I have neglected and should probably improve in. I can see the creative outcomes a more intimate relationship could uncover. 
### Reflection on Process Documentation and Tracking Tools
There is value in the documentation of process and progress, you can become addicted to collecting ideas, thoughts and past iterations of the self. I would say I document process instinctually and almost unhealthily. I am a hoarder of sketches and random fragments of text, even ones I wouldn’t dare submit or publish anywhere. I grow attached to them and out of fear of losing the thought that provoked me to write, I document them for some sort of peace of mind. I feel there is a balance to be had, you should be able to let go of some things as well. 

But I can confidently say that tracking tools and process documentation has mostly benefitted my life. Although most of the texts and fragments I digitally archive remain neglected, I find comfort in knowing they are safely stored on a hard drive, both in my desk drawer and some data centre across the globe. Sometimes I scour these files for inspiration when I am desperate, but mostly I look back and grimace. Although there is something nice in that too. 

The MS Word function that allows me to view previous saves of a document has come in handy on several occasions, sometimes an earlier draft of a work has a clearer and more complete idea or train of thought that I’ve lost through the redrafting process. To document process is to capture the movements of the mind, allowing you to scrutinise them further and come closer to understanding. 
## Week 4
### Analysis of the architecture (layers, structures, interactions) of hypertext works using Aarseth (1997) and Ryan (2006).
*In reference to Vidya Rajan's [Real-Time-Cancellation-Adventure](https://cancellation-adventure.netlify.app/) (2020):*

Most of the communication of Rajan’s (2020) work would be best articulated by Figure 4.2 (Aarseth, 1997, p. 93), although I would argue it moves between two models. For the most part, there is a clear relationship between author, narrator, narratee and reader. Rajan speaks through a fictional narrator that addresses the narratee with whom the reader connects with, but there are points where these rules are subverted. At certain junctures the reader is invited to escape the main plot for a more intimate interaction with the author. The author writes without the screen of narration and presents themselves and the context to the work before moving the reader back to the plot, forming a break between author and narrator. There are also moments where the screen blackens and disjointed fragments of text are revealed with no real connection between author to narrator or narratee to reader. These moments disturb the usual communication of the work and, in my opinion, emulate the disordered and often irrational nature of cancel-culture. It’s at these junctures, that Rajan’s work begins to resemble something closer to Figure 4.4 (Aarseth, 1997, p. 93). Through these intervals a distance forms between the narrative’s structural relationships with the “disordered state of the fragments disrupt[ing] the narrator’s efforts” (Aarseth, 19978, p. 93), and in turn sabotaging the reader’s identification with the narratee. 

In *Towards an Interactive Narratology*, Figure 2b (Ryan, 2006, p. 103) is most pertinent to *Real-Time-Cancellation-Adventure*’s interactive architecture. The reader moves through a fixed and predetermined story, or discourse, with branches that allow the reader to temporarily exit the main plot for relevant fragments and asides that serve only to assist the themes of the plot. Rajan’s work mostly uses an internal mode of interactivity, with the reader identifying with the protagonist in the first-person perspective, aside from small junctures of externality. The interactivity is also exploratory in nature as the actions of the reader explore the fictional world, but don’t alter its history or the outcomes. The reader can only finish the plot abruptly or make it to the end. The variations are the order and points the reader passes through on the way. 
### Thinking about whatever seeds of ideas are gestating in terms of your main digital project for this class, situate your potential digital work both at a personal level and within a broader context/politics. What are your motivators for telling your particular story in the digital space? Does your emerging digital work speak to a broader ethics or politics, or does it relate to a specific community or movement, or else to theory or a certain tradition?
Although I am still in the very early stages of ideation, I have a few ideas on how I might work within and approach the digital form. I am unable, at this stage, to provide a clear political or ethical motivator, but I have given thought to the why of constructing my own work of e-literature.

I typically write the ordinary, I looks for plot in the monotony and repetition of everyday life. I think there is an opportunity to explore this further in the digital realm, due to its own cyclical and menial nature — an infinite string of algorithms and processes that are constantly working towards something. The process is never completely fulfilled. I am interested in exploring this crossover between worlds and finding a unique way to construct an interactive plot from it. 

Recently, I’ve also become interested in the limitations of language and communication. The futility of it. Despite my obvious passion for the written word, it can often fail in forming connection and articulating truth. This ties in with my previous note on repetition in both the digital and physical realms. We engage with a relentless and repetitive mode of communication that seems to falter out against human instinct and the currents of ordinary life.

As per the above reflections, the digital world seems to only exacerbate the sense of absurdism present in ordinary life. An infinite loop of repetition and insatiability. There is so much work being done but it all seems to falter against a sort of inevitability. There is also a sort of surreality to the internet that I would like to engage with. I have always been interested in the state of psychosis, and I find things about the electronic dimension often mimics its sensations and characteristics. 

Of course, these ideas are presently just ramblings and loose connections, but I hope to use them as a springboard for my future work of e-literature. 

## Week 6
Refer to [class-exercises-and-project-iteration.md](https://github.com/ryu-ichii/digital-writing-folio/blob/main/class-exercises-and-project-iteration.md) for process documentation and planning across week 7 and 7.

## Week 7
### Iteration
***Have you been working with this iterative method? If so, note a particular example of how this method has worked for you as you have been developing your idea. If not, note down something you would like to test and iterate as an immediate next step:***

I have been benefitting from the iterative process throughout both the planning and creation of my work. In my mapping of the work’s interactivity architecture, I have sketched out three different versions entirely from scratch. I started with the rough drawings of my ideas in a notebook before moving to Figma to better collate and organise my thoughts. In moving from paper to Figma I got to scrutinise and better understand the flow of my work. Each iteration of my architecture map begun entirely from scratch but further developed the concepts and inspirations brought about by the previous iteration.

Through the evolution of my architecture map, I have found the iterative process to be somewhat time consuming (due to starting from scratch each time) but also far more generative than editing and working within a singular map. Letting go of a previous version and instead using it as a springboard, assisted me in not holding on to extraneous and reductive trains of thought. Typically, I may have become attached to ideas and unable to let go of them enough to truly realise the full potential of the narrative. I’ve benefitted from various new ideas for rooms and randomisation options. I’ve also been able to remove rooms that did little to progress the story and worked with increased clarity with each iteration.

Through working in iterations, I have found that I’ve been able to create ground for more raw creativity to take place. I am typically not a particularly creative person, but one that very much relies on experience and ordinary life to generate work. Through each iteration, I have had far more interesting and creative ideas about how my work of eLiterature might work, exploring more interesting and unique ways to embrace the initial impetus of the work. With each iteration I develop a stronger conceptual framework and a stronger idea of the mechanics of the work. I will continue to work iteratively as I build and edit the rooms of my work in TWINE. 

### Process Documentation
***What is the purpose of your piece? Was there an inspiration that brought it about?***

The purpose of my work is to emulate the state of psychosis and the loss of control that is brought about by it whilst exploring the cyclical and repetitive nature of modern life. I hope to reproduce the absurd qualities of existence through the eLiterature form and create something that explores this terrain in a deeper and more dynamic way than possible with traditional print. My aim is to use the digital form to create something that justifies it, and not something that is chiselled down to fit into it. 

From my own experience of psychosis, I’ve noted an uncanny resemblance in how both the digital world and psychosis heighten the sense of absurdism present in ordinary life. The absurd and surreal aspects to the state of psychosis is something I still see in the digital world every day. One can see and feel it on social media in the infinite mill of content production, and also in the transient anonymity and lack of identity brought about by it. There is something undeniably uncomfortable and bizarre about how the digital world functions, and I hope to capture that in my work of eLiterature=.  

It’s also worth noting that my eLiterature case study piece ‘motions’ (Smith, Luers, & Dean, 2013) inspired some of the style and function choices in my work. I found the experience of the work to be extremely effectual. Everything about the mood and style of the work assisted in capturing the sensation of enslavement. The way the text moved, and the way the images and sounds were generated and presented all assisted in conveying this state of suffocation. All the individual elements combined to create a riper landscape for meaning and understanding to emerge from. It is my goal to attempt to digitally articulate psychosis and futility in similar fashion, using randomisation, chaotic movement and effects, and compelling use of sound to achieve a similar effect.

The work sets out to explore the inherent similarities between the digital sphere and ordinary life. As mentioned in my previous week four entry, language and existence itself seem to falter out against an inevitability. Our constant attempt to live and communicate is endless, we never quite reach our destination. Much like the constant stream of algorithms working endlessly behind the scenes, we are never quite complete. Our desire to find some sort of understanding is insatiable. Our endless stream of choices and actions seem to falter out against a truth.

***What is the overall vision for your piece (spatially, architecturally) and how do the prototyped four rooms/screens fit into that vision? Have you received feedback on anything that is missing or unclear, that you need to develop further?***

The architectural vision is that of a flowchart, like the one present in Ryan (2006) Figure 3b. The work moves quite efficiently; the branches or strands of plot that expand out from the doctor’s office always bring the reader back to the main plot. Although the reader is met with an array of options and decisions, the reader inevitably returns to the central narrative. Although randomisation and the varying paths function as different experiences, they all seek to assist in conveying the universal themes of the work.

Although I have a much stronger idea for how randomisation will work in comparison to week six, I still need to establish the exact mechanics of it. I want to further explore how randomisation will function and how randomised text will be presented on the page. I also need to further explore the customisation capabilities of TWINE Harlowe. I want animations and visual elements, like moving and flashing text, to better embody the complete confusion and surreality of psychosis. In these random passages, the text and design elements should work together to recreate its debilitating effects.

***What are the practical next steps you will take to prepare your work-in-progress for presentation (including presenting in class next week on Wednesday or Thursday and turning in your slides by next Friday 1st May)?***

- [X]	Prepare some notes over the week that I can refer to alongside the presentation slide. Keep the slides clean and succinct while having points for expansion and observation in my presentation notes. 
- [X]	Ensure the four rooms in TWINE are completed to a standard I am satisfied with. A presentable state that reflects my current vision for the work both textually and aestheically.
- [X]	Reflect on the processes, challenges, goals, and interactivity architecture sketches thus far for use in the presentation. 
- [X]	Delve deeper into the overall objective and of my work and what it seeks to convey and capture. The politics or philsophy of the work.
